---
layout: post
title: "Pastel Interfaces"
description: "I prefer light color themes in applications."
thumbnail: "static/img/posts/pastel_palette.png"
date: 2020-09-04 20:30
---

I prefer light color themes in application interfaces. Never understood this craze about
dark interfaces. As I spend a lot of time in a code editor, I believe light colors are 
easier for my eyes. But, not the point.

Recently I noticed that in some applications – Firefox, IntelliJ IDEA, for example, – I
switched to new color themes that looks similar to each other. Here is 
[the Calm Pastel 4][firefox-pastel] theme for Firefox:

{% include image.html url="/static/img/posts/pastel_firefox.png" enlarge=true description="Calm Pastel 4" %}

And here is the [Pastel-licious][intellij-pastel] for IntelliJ IDEA (I love this theme!):

{% include image.html url="/static/img/posts/pastel_intellij_idea.png" enlarge=true description="Pastel-licious" %}

Both of these themes are in one color palette – pastel. But what does this word even mean?!
I have heard multiple times things like “to draw with pastel“, or this picture is in 
pastel tones, etc. But I had only vague idea about what that meant. So I decided to dig
a bit.

So the word “pastel“ comes from Italian “pastello“, that comes from Italian “pasta“. Nice,
I love Bolognese. Hm, wait, it's not about food here... Anyway, pastel is both a name for
an art medium in the form of a stick and a drawing technique. It is used during the 
preparation phase for paintings, but some artists use it as a standalone art form. It is
only possible with the usage of special fixative, since pastel material is very easy
to destroy. One of the most prominent pastels is [The Chocolate Girl](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Chocolate_Girl):

{% include image.html url="/static/img/posts/pastel-the-chocolate-girl.jpg" description="By Jean-Étienne Liotard" %}

But I digress. I will not go really deep into that. You better just read it in 
[Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pastel). What drives my attention to these type
of themes is [pastel colors](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pastel_(color)). This is a
palette of muted pale shades with high value and low saturation.

{% include image.html url="/static/img/posts/pastel_palette.png" description="Example of pastel palette" %}

All these colors have one common characteristic: they are soft to the eye, calm, warm.
They do not irritate our eyes and do not distract, letting your eyes relax. Seems like
I am choosing these type of color theme subconsciously – it is just easy and pleasant 
to look at such interfaces for a long time.

[firefox-pastel]: https://addons.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox/addon/calm-pastel-4/
[intellij-pastel]: https://plugins.jetbrains.com/plugin/12257-pastel-licious
